---
title: Programming Thinking
subtitle: Session 6
author: Pepe García <jgarciah@faculty.ie.edu>
email: Pepe García<jgarciah@faculty.ie.edu>
---

# Codecademy

You have been invited to **Codecademy**.  Please follow the link in
your email and create an account.  There will be some sessions in
which you'll be required to get something done in Codecademy, but for
now, explore and see if there's any course that catches your eye.

# Plan for today

>- review last day exercises
>- mutability
>- lists
>- iteration

# Last session exercises

1. Create a function `weekly_commute_time` that asks the user their daily
   commute time and returns their weekly time spent commuting.

2. What do the following expressions return?
   - `True or 11 > 34`
   - `False and (1 == 1)`
   - `(77 // 11) > 6 and False`

5. Create a function `im_in_love` that takes a weekday number (from monday to
   friday), and returns how that weekday is (according to The Cure!):

```
I don't care if Monday's blue
Tuesday's grey and Wednesday too
Thursday I don't care about you
It's Friday, I'm in love
```

# Mutability

Mutability is a feature of variables in most programming languages.  It
means that variables can be updated to newer values.

```python
x = 1
x = x * 3

print(x)
```

. . .

## Demo

Let's refresh how we can change the value of a variable in Spyder.

# Iteration

Iteration is the act of repeating a process.  In Python we express
iteration with the **while** statement

. . .

```python
while <condition>:
    <body>
```

# While

```python
while <condition>:
    <body>
```

## How does it work?

. . .

1. Evaluate the condition

. . .

2. If the condition is False, exit while and go to next statement

. . .

3. If condition is true, execute body.  Then go to step 1.

. . .

## Demo

Let's see how does the **while** loop work.  Let's create a function that
prints the numbers 1 to 50 (using iteration)

# Practice

## exercise

Create a function `pyramid` that receives an integer `n` as
parameter and prints `n` lines of the following pattern:

```
*
**
***
****
*****
```

# Lists

Lists are sequences of values


# Constructing Lists

We construct lists with the brackets **[]** syntax.  We surround
everything that we want to include in the list with **square
brackets** and separate elements with **commas**:

```python
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
["hello", "dolly"]
[]
[1, "hello", 2, "dolly", 3]
```

. . .

## Demo

Let's create some lists and see the type of those values.

# List length

We can get the length of a list using the **len** function:

```python
names = ["Pepe", "Antonio"]
print(len(names)) # will print 2
```

# Accessing list elements

We use **square brackets** to access elements by their **index**.

\begin{alertblock}{Indices}
\textbf{indices} in lists start by \textbf{0}, not 1.
\end{alertblock}

```python
words = ["hello", "dolly"]
words[0]
# "hello"
words[1]
# "dolly"
```

. . .

## Demo

# Practice

## Exercise

Create a function that receives a list as a parameter and prints each
element of the list individually.

# Operators on lists

As with strings, **+** and **\*** operators work with lists too!

. . .

## Demo

# Mutating lists

Lists are mutable values, and they provide functionality to add, delete,
and update elements

# Updating elements in the list

To update an element inside the list, we use a syntax similar to the one
for declaring variables, but using the brackets and the index we refer
to.

```python
numbers = [1,2,4]
numbers[2] = 3
print(numbers) # prints [1,2,3]
```

. . .

## Demo

# Appending elements to the list

To add a new element to the end of the list we use the append() method
on it.

```python
numbers = [1,2,3]
numbers.append(4)
print(numbers) # prints [1,2,3,4]
```

. . .

## Demo

# Inserting elements in the list

There\'s an alternative way of adding new elements to the list, and
it\'s using the insert() method on it:

```python
words = ["hello","my","friends"]
words.insert(2, "dear")
print(words) # prints ["hello", "my", "dear", "friends"]
```

The difference between this and append is that with insert we can choose
where to put it by using the target index

. . .

## Demo

# Removing elements from the list

In order to remove an element from a list, we should use the .pop()
method, and pass the index of the element we want to remove

```python
words = ["hello","my","friend"]
words.pop(1)
print(words)
```

. . .

## Demo

# For loops

For loops are simpler than while loops. They iterate over elements in a
list.  They loop once for every element in the list.

. . .

```python
for <iteration_variable> in <list>:
    <body>
```

In each iteration, we will have a new value for the `iteration_variable`.

. . .

## Demo

# Practice

## Exercise

create a function named **to_string** that receives a list and returns
a string with all elements of the list concatenated.  Don't use the
`join` function.

# Recap

. . .

We will use **while** loops for iterating given a boolean condition.

. . .

Use **lists** to store collections of values

. . .

Use mutation operations on list to append, remove, or update elements in
the list

. . .

Use for loops to iterate over elements in the list

# Exercises

- Create a function that returns a list of numbers from 0 to 500

- Create a function that takes a list of numbers (you can use the one
   you created in the previous exercise) and returns the sum of all of
   them

- Investigate the `range()` function.  After you've used it, create a
   function that receives a number as parameter and prints all numbers
   from it to zero (using a for loop).

- Create a function that takes a list of numbers and returns the
   maximum value among them

- Create a function that takes a list of numbers and returns the
   minimum value among them

(cont)

# Exercises (Cont)

- Create a function that prints the numbers 1 to 50 (using iteration)

- Create a program that prints multiplication tables from 1 to 10

- Create a function `inverted_piramid` that writes the pyramid of
  stars in an inverted fashion.

```
*****
****
***
**
*
```

(cont)

# Exercises (Cont)

- Create a function `multiplicate` that takes two integers (`a` and
  `b`, for example) and returns a times b.  Do not use the `*`
  operator.

- Create a function `exponentiate` that takes two arguments `base`
  and `exponent` and raises `base` to the `exponent` power.  Do not
  use the `**` operator.

# Recommended literature

<https://www.py4e.com/html3/05-iterations>

<https://www.py4e.com/lessons/lists>
